Add docs for codeql workspaces (#10182)
github/codeql: docs/codeql/codeql-cli/about-codeql-workspaces.rst

.. _about-codeql-workspaces:

About CodeQL Workspaces
=======================

.. include:: ../reusables/beta-note-package-management.rst

> CodeQL workspaces are used to group multiple CodeQL packs together. CodeQL packs in the same workspace are automatically available as source dependencies for each other when running any CodeQL command that resolves queries. This makes it easier to develope and maintain multiple, related CodeQL packs. A typical use case for a CodeQL workspace is for developing one or more CodeQL library packs and one or more query packs that depends on it in them in the same location.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CodeQL workspaces are used to group multiple CodeQL packs together. CodeQL packs in the same workspace are automatically available as source dependencies for each other when running any CodeQL command that resolves queries. This makes it easier to develop and maintain multiple, related CodeQL packs. A typical use case for a CodeQL workspace is for developing one or more CodeQL library packs and one or more query packs that depends on it in them in the same location.
```

> A typical use case for a CodeQL workspace is for developing one or more CodeQL library packs and one or more query packs that depends on it in them in the same location.

I failed to parse this sentence.

Author: Thanks for the review! I will reword this to make it more understandable.

In most cases, the CodeQL workspace and all CodeQL packs contained in it should be stored in the same git repository so the development environment is more easily sharable.

The ``codeql-workspae.yml`` file
--------------------------------

A CodeQL workspace is defined by a ``codeql-workspace.yml`` yaml file. This file contains a ``provide`` block, and optionally an ``ignore`` block. The ``provide`` block contains a list of glob patterns that define the CodeQL packs that are available in the workspace. The ``ignore`` block contains a list of glob patterns that define CodeQL packs that are not available in the workspace. Each entry in the ``provide`` or ``ignore`` section must map to a path to a ``qlpack.yml`` file. All glob patterns are relative to the directory containing the workspace file. See `@actions/glob <https://github.com/actions/toolkit/tree/main/packages/glob#patterns>` for a list of patterns accepted in this file.

> For example, the following ``codeql-workspace.yml`` file defines a workspace that contains all CodeQl packs recursively found in the ``codeql-packs`` directory, except for the packs in the ``experimental`` directory:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, the following ``codeql-workspace.yml`` file defines a workspace that contains all CodeQL packs recursively found in the ``codeql-packs`` directory, except for the packs in the ``experimental`` directory:
```

.. _about-codeql-workspaces:

About CodeQL Workspaces
=======================

.. include:: ../reusables/beta-note-package-management.rst

CodeQL workspaces are used to group multiple CodeQL packs together. A typical use case for a CodeQL workspace is for developing a set of CodeQL library and query packs that are mutually dependent. For more information on CodeQL packs, see ":doc:`About CodeQL packs <about-codeql-packs>`."

The main benefit of a CodeQl workspace is that it is easier to develop and maintain multiple CodeQL packs. When a CodeQL workspace is used, all CodeQL packs in the workspace are available as *source dependencies* for each other when running any CodeQL command that resolves queries. This makes it easier to develope and maintain multiple, related CodeQL packs.

In most cases, the CodeQL workspace and all CodeQL packs contained in it should be stored in the same git repository so the development environment is more easily sharable.

The ``codeql-workspae.yml`` file
--------------------------------

> A CodeQL workspace is defined by a ``codeql-workspace.yml`` yaml file. This file contains a ``provide`` block, and optionally an ``ignore`` block. The ``provide`` block contains a list of glob patterns that define the CodeQL packs that are available in the workspace. The ``ignore`` block contains a list of glob patterns that define CodeQL packs that are not available in the workspace. Each entry in the ``provide`` or ``ignore`` section must map to a path to a ``qlpack.yml`` file. All glob patterns are relative to the directory containing the workspace file. See `@actions/glob <https://github.com/actions/toolkit/tree/main/packages/glob#patterns>` for a list of patterns accepted in this file.

Reviewer 2: I think the link is missing two trailing underscores.

```suggestion
A CodeQL workspace is defined by a ``codeql-workspace.yml`` yaml file. This file contains a ``provide`` block, and optionally an ``ignore`` block. The ``provide`` block contains a list of glob patterns that define the CodeQL packs that are available in the workspace. The ``ignore`` block contains a list of glob patterns that define CodeQL packs that are not available in the workspace. Each entry in the ``provide`` or ``ignore`` section must map to a path to a ``qlpack.yml`` file. All glob patterns are relative to the directory containing the workspace file. See `@actions/glob <https://github.com/actions/toolkit/tree/main/packages/glob#patterns>`__ for a list of patterns accepted in this file.
```

Author: Hmmmm....that doesn't look right. 

<img width="681" alt="About_CodeQL_Workspaces_—_CodeQL" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/363559/187738207-2eae18df-f376-4211-8892-0f061388ac62.png">

I'll figure out what is going on.

Author: User error. Your suggestion was correct. :)

> A CodeQL workspace is defined by a ``codeql-workspace.yml`` yaml file. This file contains a ``provide`` block, and optionally an ``ignore`` block. The ``provide`` block contains a list of glob patterns that define the CodeQL packs that are available in the workspace. The ``ignore`` block contains a list of glob patterns that define CodeQL packs that are not available in the workspace. Each entry in the ``provide`` or ``ignore`` section must map to a path to a ``qlpack.yml`` file. All glob patterns are relative to the directory containing the workspace file. See `@actions/glob <https://github.com/actions/toolkit/tree/main/packages/glob#patterns>`__ for a list of patterns accepted in this file.

Author: Looks like a duplicate comment. I will ignore.

> A CodeQL workspace is defined by a ``codeql-workspace.yml`` yaml file. This file contains a ``provide`` block, and optionally an ``ignore`` block. The ``provide`` block contains a list of glob patterns that define the CodeQL packs that are available in the workspace. The ``ignore`` block contains a list of glob patterns that define CodeQL packs that are not available in the workspace. Each entry in the ``provide`` or ``ignore`` section must map to a path to a ``qlpack.yml`` file. All glob patterns are relative to the directory containing the workspace file. See `@actions/glob <https://github.com/actions/toolkit/tree/main/packages/glob#patterns>`__ for a list of patterns accepted in this file.

Author: Same.

For example, the following ``codeql-workspace.yml`` file defines a workspace that contains all CodeQL packs recursively found in the ``codeql-packs`` directory, except for the packs in the ``experimental`` directory:

.. code-block:: yaml

    provide:
      - "*/codeql-packs/**/qlpack.yml"
    ignore:
      - "*/codeql-packs/**/experimental/**/qlpack.yml"

> To verify that you have the correct ``codeql-workspace.yml`` file, run ``codeql pack ls`` command in the same directory as your workspace. The result of the command is a list of all CodeQL packs in the workspace.

Author: This is to check that your workspace file correctly references the packs that you are expecting. I will clarify.

CodeQL workspaces and query resolution
--------------------------------------

> All CodeQL packs in a workspace are available as source dependencies for each other when running any CodeQL command that resolves queries or packs. For example, when ``codeql pack install`` is run in a pack directory in a workspace, any dependency found in the workspace will not be downloaded to the package cache, nor will it be added to the resulting ``codeql-pack.lock.yml`` file. See `:ref:Adding and Installing Dependencies <adding-and-installing-dependencies>` for more information.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
All CodeQL packs in a workspace are available as source dependencies for each other when you run any CodeQL command that resolves queries or packs. For example, when you run ``codeql pack install`` in a pack directory in a workspace, any dependency that can be found in the workspace will be instead of downloading that dependency to the package cache and adding it to the ``codeql-pack.lock.yml`` file. For more information, see `:ref:Adding and Installing Dependencies <adding-and-installing-dependencies>`__.
```

> Similarly, publishing a CodeQL query pack to the GitHub container registry using  ``codeql pack publish`` will always use dependencies found in the workspace instead of using dependencies found in the local package cache.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Similarly, when you publish a CodeQL query pack to the GitHub container registry using  ``codeql pack publish`` the command will always use the dependencies from the workspace instead of using dependencies found in the local package cache.
```

> This ensures that any local change to a query library in a dependency in the same workspace will be automatically reflected in the published query pack.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This ensures that any local changes you make to a query library in a dependency are automatically reflected in any query packs you publish from that workspace.
```

.. pull-quote::

  Note

>   Source dependencies are CodeQL packs that are resolved from the filesystem. They might be in the same CodeQL workspace, or specified a path option in the ``--additional-packs`` argument. Source dependencies override any dependencies found in the local package cache and version constraints are ignored. This ensures that during local development version mismatches can be ignored.

Reviewer 2: Missing 'as'?

```suggestion
  Source dependencies are CodeQL packs that are resolved from the filesystem. They might be in the same CodeQL workspace, or specified as a path option in the ``--additional-packs`` argument. Source dependencies override any dependencies found in the local package cache and version constraints are ignored. This ensures that during local development version mismatches can be ignored.
```

>   Source dependencies are CodeQL packs that are resolved from the filesystem. They might be in the same CodeQL workspace, or specified as a path option in the ``--additional-packs`` argument. Source dependencies override any dependencies found in the local package cache and version constraints are ignored. This ensures that during local development version mismatches can be ignored.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  Source dependencies are CodeQL packs that are resolved from the local file system. These dependencies can be in the same CodeQL workspace, or specified as a path option using the ``--additional-packs`` argument. Source dependencies override any dependencies found in the local package cache and any version constraints defined in the cache are ignored. This ensures that when you are developing CodeQL locally any version mismatches can be ignored.
```

I've suggested what I think is a simpler construction above, but it's true to say that I'm left wondering if that means that you're likely to publish a CodeQL pack with version mismatches that might cause your users problems.

Author: Thanks for the suggestion. It's not quite right. And I can understand where your confusion is coming from.  Version constraints are defined in the qlpack.yml. 

Source dependencies are generally useful in two situations:

- The main use case is when you are doing local development and want to override some dependencies as you work out some changes across multiple packs during development.
- You want to override a dependency in your cache for some reason (maybe there's a bug in the published version, or you have made a custom tweak to one of the published packs).

I can clarify this a little better and incorporate parts of your suggestion.

Author: Hmmm...thinking about this some more, it's even more complicated. You _can_ specify `--additional-packs` when you run `pack publish`. This means that you can publish packs using source resolution to override the default resolution. I thought we had disabled that, but we didn't. I can't see a situation where this would be a good thing to do (since you will be publishing your pack with contents that don't match the qlpack.yml).

I'll make sure to mention that doing so is not recommended.

Author: To be clear, I was distinguishing source dependencies resolved from the same workspace (which 100% _should_ be in the published pack) with source dependencies resolved from `--additional-packs`, which probably shouldn't.

The reason is that with dependencies in the workspace, we expect that all packs are tightly connected and should change in lock-step with each other. Also, they should all be available in the same git repo, so it is easy to edit all of them at once.

Source dependencies from `--additional-packs` can come from anywhere and it may be hard to track down exactly which versions are being used.

However...it's also true that all published query packs contain all of their transitive dependencies, so even if you override some of the expected dependencies with source dependencies, you can inspect them in the published pack. 

Apologies for going into the weeds here. I'm trying to figure out what is important to mention and what is superfluous for the docs.

Author: @felicitymay I'm not sure if this paragraph answers your questions. 

https://github.com/github/codeql/pull/10182/commits/94a6506cbb6899c709a47edca0a2a5109d20dba4#diff-8c14f9abe9524e8201b042c7288e073c2db2fb3d7adb88a5bf79427879a018e9R49-R54

Please let me know if this is clear enough to you.

Reviewer 3: Thanks. That looks clearer to me.

Example
~~~~~~~

Consider the following ``codeql-workspace.yml`` file:

.. code-block:: yaml

    provide:
      - "**/qlpack.yml"

And the following CodeQL library pack ``qlpack.yml`` file in the workspace:

.. code-block:: yaml

    name: my-company/my-library
    library: true
    version: 1.0.0

And the following CodeQL query pack ``qlpack.yml`` file in the workspace:

.. code-block:: yaml

    name: my-company/my-queries
    version: 1.0.0
    dependencies:
      my-company/my-library: "*"
      codeql/cpp-all: ~0.2.0

> Notice that ``"*"`` is specified as the version constraint for the library pack. Because the library pack is a source dependency, the version constraint is not needed since the library pack's content is always resolved from inside of the workspace. Any version constraint will be ignored in this case, but it is recommended to use ``"*"`` for source dependencies to avoid confusion.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Notice that, for ``my-company/my-queries``, ``"*"`` is specified as the version constraint for the library pack in the ``dependencies`` block. The library pack is defined as a source dependency in ``codeql-workspace.yml``, so the version constraint is not needed since the library pack's content is always resolved from inside of the workspace. Any version constraint will be ignored in this case, but it is recommended to use ``"*"`` for source dependencies to avoid confusion.
```

> Notice that, for ``my-company/my-queries``, ``"*"`` is specified as the version constraint for the library pack in the ``dependencies`` block. The library pack is defined as a source dependency in ``codeql-workspace.yml``, so the version constraint is not needed since the library pack's content is always resolved from inside of the workspace. Any version constraint will be ignored in this case, but it is recommended to use ``"*"`` for source dependencies to avoid confusion.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Notice that the ``dependencies`` block for the CodeQL query pack,``my-company/my-queries``, specifies  ``"*"`` as the version of the library pack. Since the library pack is already defined as a source dependency in ``codeql-workspace.yml``, the library pack's content is always resolved from inside the workspace. Any version constraint you define will be ignored in this case. We recommend that you use ``"*"`` for source dependencies to make it clear that the version is inherited from the workspace.
```

Please check whether I've introduced any errors or fantasies as I've updated the text to make it less academic 🙈

> When ``codeql pack install`` is executed from the query pack directory, an appropriate version of ``codeql/cpp-all`` will be downloaded to the local package cache. Also, a ``codeql-pack.lock.yml`` file will be created that contains the resolved version of ``codeql/cpp-all``, but no entry for ``my-company/my-library`` since it is resolved from source. The ``codeql-pack.lock.yml`` file will look something like this:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When ``codeql pack install`` is executed from the query pack directory, an appropriate version of ``codeql/cpp-all`` will be downloaded to the local package cache. Also, a ``codeql-pack.lock.yml`` file will be created that contains the resolved version of ``codeql/cpp-all``. The lock file won't contain an entry for ``my-company/my-library`` since it is resolved from source. The ``codeql-pack.lock.yml`` file will look something like this:
```

> When ``codeql pack install`` is executed from the query pack directory, an appropriate version of ``codeql/cpp-all`` will be downloaded to the local package cache. Also, a ``codeql-pack.lock.yml`` file will be created that contains the resolved version of ``codeql/cpp-all``. The lock file won't contain an entry for ``my-company/my-library`` since it is resolved from source. The ``codeql-pack.lock.yml`` file will look something like this:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When you execute ``codeql pack install`` from the query pack directory, an appropriate version of ``codeql/cpp-all`` is downloaded to the local package cache. Also, a ``codeql-pack.lock.yml`` file is created that contains the resolved version of ``codeql/cpp-all``. The lock file won't contain an entry for ``my-company/my-library`` since it is resolved from source dependencies. The ``codeql-pack.lock.yml`` file will look something like this:
```

.. code-block:: yaml

   dependencies:
     codeql/cpp-all:
       version: 0.2.2

> When ``codeql pack publish`` is executed from the query pack directory, the ``codeql/cpp-all`` dependency from the package cache and the ``my-company/my-library`` from the workspace will be bundled with ``my-company/my-queries`` and published to the GitHub container registry.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When you execute``codeql pack publish`` from the query pack directory, the ``codeql/cpp-all`` dependency from the package cache and the ``my-company/my-library`` from the workspace are bundled with ``my-company/my-queries`` and published to the GitHub container registry.
```

.. _about-codeql-workspaces:

About CodeQL Workspaces
=======================

.. include:: ../reusables/beta-note-package-management.rst

CodeQL workspaces are used to group multiple CodeQL packs together. A typical use case for a CodeQL workspace is to develop a set of CodeQL library and query packs that are mutually dependent. For more information on CodeQL packs, see ":doc:`About CodeQL packs <about-codeql-packs>`."

The main benefit of a CodeQL workspace is that it makes it easier for you to develop and maintain multiple CodeQL packs. When you use a CodeQL workspace, all the CodeQL packs in the workspace are available as *source dependencies* for each other when you run a CodeQL command that resolves queries. This makes it easier to develop, maintain, and publish multiple, related CodeQL packs.

In most cases, you should store the CodeQL workspace and the CodeQL packs contained in it in one git repository. This makes it easier to share your CodeQL development environment.

> The ``codeql-workspace.yml`` file
> --------------------------------

Reviewer 3: It looks as if the underline here is too short, causing the test failure that's blocking the Sphinx docs generation. Will attempt to fix so that I can review the output.

```suggestion
The ``codeql-workspace.yml`` file
----------------------------------
```

A CodeQL workspace is defined by a ``codeql-workspace.yml`` yaml file. This file contains a ``provide`` block, and optionally an ``ignore`` block.

* The ``provide`` block contains a list of glob patterns that define the CodeQL packs that are available in the workspace.
* The ``ignore`` block contains a list of glob patterns that define CodeQL packs that are not available in the workspace.

> Each entry in the ``provide`` or ``ignore`` section must map to the location of a ``qlpack.yml`` file. All glob patterns are defined relative to the directory that contains the workspace file. For a list of patterns accepted in this file, see" `@actions/glob <https://github.com/actions/toolkit/tree/main/packages/glob#patterns>`__ .

Reviewer 3: Typo:

```suggestion
Each entry in the ``provide`` or ``ignore`` section must map to the location of a ``qlpack.yml`` file. All glob patterns are defined relative to the directory that contains the workspace file. For a list of patterns accepted in this file, see "`@actions/glob <https://github.com/actions/toolkit/tree/main/packages/glob#patterns>`__ ."
```

For example, the following ``codeql-workspace.yml`` file defines a workspace that contains all the CodeQL packs recursively found in the ``codeql-packs`` directory, except for the packs in the ``experimental`` directory:

.. code-block:: yaml

    provide:
      - "*/codeql-packs/**/qlpack.yml"
    ignore:
      - "*/codeql-packs/**/experimental/**/qlpack.yml"

> To verify that your ``codeql-workspace.yml`` file includes the CodeQL packs that you expect, run ``codeql pack ls`` command in the same directory as your workspace. The result of the command is a list of all CodeQL packs in the workspace.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To verify that your ``codeql-workspace.yml`` file includes the CodeQL packs that you expect, run the ``codeql pack ls`` command in the same directory as your workspace. The result of the command is a list of all CodeQL packs in the workspace.
```

CodeQL workspaces and query resolution
--------------------------------------

> All CodeQL packs in a workspace are available as source dependencies for each other when you run any CodeQL command that resolves queries or packs. For example, when you run ``codeql pack install`` in a pack directory in a workspace, any dependency that can be found in the workspace will be instead of downloading that dependency to the package cache and adding it to the ``codeql-pack.lock.yml`` file. For more information, see `:ref:Adding and Installing Dependencies <adding-and-installing-dependencies>`__.

Reviewer 3: Missing word and formatting issue:

```suggestion
All CodeQL packs in a workspace are available as source dependencies for each other when you run any CodeQL command that resolves queries or packs. For example, when you run ``codeql pack install`` in a pack directory in a workspace, any dependency that can be found in the workspace will be used instead of downloading that dependency to the package cache and adding it to the ``codeql-pack.lock.yml`` file. For more information, see ":ref:`Adding and Installing Dependencies <adding-and-installing-dependencies>`."
```

Similarly, when you publish a CodeQL query pack to the GitHub container registry using  ``codeql pack publish`` the command will always use the dependencies from the workspace instead of using dependencies found in the local package cache.

This ensures that any local changes you make to a query library in a dependency are automatically reflected in any query packs you publish from that workspace.

.. pull-quote::

  Note

  Source dependencies are CodeQL packs that are resolved from the local file system. These dependencies can be in the same CodeQL workspace, or specified as a path option using the ``--additional-packs`` argument. When you compile and run queries locally, source dependencies override any dependencies found in the local package cache as well as version constraints defined in the ``qlpack.yml``.

  This is particularly useful in the following situations:

>   - One of the dependencies of the query pack you are running is not yet published. Resolving from source is the only way to refernce that pack.

Reviewer 3: Small typo:

```suggestion
  - One of the dependencies of the query pack you are running is not yet published. Resolving from source is the only way to reference that pack.
```

>   - You are making changes to multiple packs at the same time and want to test them together. Resolving from source ensures that you are using the version of the pack with your changes in it.

Reviewer 3: I should have spotted this in my original review. It seems as if this should be a section with its own title somewhere in this article. On line 10 we introduce the term in italics, but we don't currently have anyway to link to more information about source dependencies.

I'd recommend moving this information into a new section called "Source dependencies" or "Source dependencies in a workspace". Exactly where this section should go, and what other changes we should make to the rest of the content isn't entirely clear to me. It seems as if this concept is fundamental to the purpose of a workspace, so could arguably go towards the top of the article.

Author: Thank you. That is a good suggestion. I had a stab at this. I decided to put the source dependencies immediately after the section describing the `codeql-workspace.yml` file itself. I think this works ok.

Reviewer 3: 👍🏻 Thanks 🙂

Example
~~~~~~~

Consider the following ``codeql-workspace.yml`` file:

.. code-block:: yaml

    provide:
      - "**/qlpack.yml"

And the following CodeQL library pack ``qlpack.yml`` file in the workspace:

.. code-block:: yaml

    name: my-company/my-library
    library: true
    version: 1.0.0

And the following CodeQL query pack ``qlpack.yml`` file in the workspace:

.. code-block:: yaml

    name: my-company/my-queries
    version: 1.0.0
    dependencies:
      my-company/my-library: "*"
      codeql/cpp-all: ~0.2.0

> Notice that the ``dependencies`` block for the CodeQL query pack,``my-company/my-queries``, specifies  ``"*"`` as the version of the library pack. Since the library pack is already defined as a source dependency in ``codeql-workspace.yml``, the library pack's content is always resolved from inside the workspace. Any version constraint you define will be ignored in this case. We recommend that you use ``"*"`` for source dependencies to make it clear that the version is inherited from the workspace.

Reviewer 3: Formatting issue in the generated content:

<img width="856" alt="image" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1877141/188407283-3c855236-9b7e-45ec-9078-12ccf3727572.png">

Likely fix.

```suggestion
Notice that the ``dependencies`` block for the CodeQL query pack, ``my-company/my-queries``, specifies  ``"*"`` as the version of the library pack. Since the library pack is already defined as a source dependency in ``codeql-workspace.yml``, the library pack's content is always resolved from inside the workspace. Any version constraint you define will be ignored in this case. We recommend that you use ``"*"`` for source dependencies to make it clear that the version is inherited from the workspace.
```

When you execute ``codeql pack install`` from the query pack directory, an appropriate version of ``codeql/cpp-all`` is downloaded to the local package cache. Also, a ``codeql-pack.lock.yml`` file is created that contains the resolved version of ``codeql/cpp-all``. The lock file won't contain an entry for ``my-company/my-library`` since it is resolved from source dependencies. The ``codeql-pack.lock.yml`` file will look something like this:

.. code-block:: yaml

   dependencies:
     codeql/cpp-all:
       version: 0.2.2

> When you execute``codeql pack publish`` from the query pack directory, the ``codeql/cpp-all`` dependency from the package cache and the ``my-company/my-library`` from the workspace are bundled with ``my-company/my-queries`` and published to the GitHub container registry.

Reviewer 3: Space issue:

```suggestion
When you execute ``codeql pack publish`` from the query pack directory, the ``codeql/cpp-all`` dependency from the package cache and the ``my-company/my-library`` from the workspace are bundled with ``my-company/my-queries`` and published to the GitHub container registry.
```
